---
author: Nicolas P. Rougier
layout: post
title:  Neural Field Model of the Cortex
date:   2012-07-12
tags:   neuroscience article
category: news
---

We investigate the formation and maintenance of ordered topographic maps in the
primary somatosensory cortex as well as the reorganization of representations
after sensory deprivation or cortical lesion. We consider both the critical
period (postnatal) where representations are shaped and the post-critical
period where representations are maintained and possibly reorganized. We
hypothesize that feed-forward thalamocortical connections are an adequate site
of plasticity while cortico-cortical connections are believed to drive a
competitive mechanism that is critical for learning. We model a small skin
patch located on the distal phalangeal surface of a digit as a set of 256
Merkel ending complexes (MEC) that feed a computational model of the primary
somatosensory cortex (area 3b). This model is a two-dimensional neural field
where spatially localized solutions (a.k.a. bumps) drive cortical plasticity
through a Hebbian-like learning rule. Simulations explain the initial formation
of ordered representations following repetitive and random stimulations of the
skin patch. Skin lesions as well as cortical lesions are also studied and
results confirm the possibility to reorganize representations using the same
learning rule and depending on the type of the lesion. For severe lesions, the
model suggests that cortico-cortical connections may play an important role in
complete recovery.


## References

{% bibliography --query @*[hal_id=hal-00716355] %}
