---
author: Nicolas P. Rougier
layout: post
title:  Georgios PhD defense
date:   2013-10-23
tags:   neuroscience defense
category: news
---


Georgios Is. Detorakis will defend his thesis at the Loria laboratory on Octber
23rd, 2013. The title is
[Cortical plasticity, dynamic neural fields and self-organization][thesis].

[thesis]: https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-00879910v1

## Jury

* Nicolas Rougier (co-director)
* Fréderic Alexandre (co-director)
* Hugues Berry (reviewer)
* Philippe Gaussier (reviewer)
* Danisl Shulz (examiner)
* Sylvain Contassot-Vivier (examiner)

## Abstract.

The aim of the present work is the modeling of the formation, maintenance and
reorganization of somatosensory cortical maps using the theory of dynamic
neural fields. A dynamic neural field is a partial integro-differential
equation that is used to model the cortical activity of a part of the
cortex. Such a neural field is used in this work in order to model a part of
the area 3b of the primary somatosensory cortex. In addition a skin model is
used in order to provide input to the cortical model. From a computational
point of view the model is able to perform distributed, numerical and adaptive
computations. The model is able to explain the formation of topographic maps
and their reorganization in the presence of a cortical lesion or a sensory
deprivation, where balance between excitation and inhibition plays a crucial
role. In addition, the model is consistent with neurophysiological data of area
3b. Finally, it has been shown that attention plays a key role in the
organization of receptive fields of neurons of the somatosensory
cortex. Therefore, in this work has been proposed a definition of somatosensory
attention and a potential explanation of its influence on somatotopic
organization through a number of experimental results. By changing the gains of
lateral connections, it is possible to control the shape of the solution of the
neural field. This leads to significant alterations of receptive fields sizes,
resulting to a better performance during the execution of demanding haptic
tasks.
