---
author: Nicolas P. Rougier
layout: post
title:  PRACE Winter school
date:   2013-03-19
tags:   visualization tutorial invited
category: news
---


I'll be giving a course on scientific visualization (general introduction,
python and matplotlib) at the PRACE Winter school on March 19th, 2013 in the
Chartered Accountants House, Dublin, Ireland. This is a 3 day course aimed at
scientists who wish to learn the fundamentals of several tools and techniques
that are commonly used to generate visualisation of scientific research.

## About the course

The PRACE Winter School on Scientific Visualiation 2013 is a 3 day course aimed
at scientists who wish to learn the fundamentals of several tools and
techniques that are commonly used to generate visualisation of scientific
research. The school will cover the following topics:

* Plotting with R (basic R syntax and concepts, preparing your data, plotting
  packages)
* Python (basic introduction of the language, use of the Matplotlib library to
  generate visualisation programmatically)
* VisIt and Paraview (introduction to the VisIt and Paraview packages to
  visualise 3D datasets)

The event will be a mix of talks and hands-on sessions conducted in
English. All attendees are expected to bring their own laptops to the event for
the hands-on sessions. Attendees are expected to have basic knowledge of at
least one programming/scripting language (e.g. C, Fortran, Java, Perl, Python).
The school is offered free of charge to students and academics studying/working
in PRACE member states. Lunches, coffee breaks and a social dinner are included
as part of the event.
