---
author: Nicolas P. Rougier
layout: post
title:  Computational Neuroscience Summer school
date:   2014-01-13
tags:   neuroscience tutorial invited
category: news
---

I'll give a tutorial on Reinforcement Learning at the [Latin-American Summer
School in Computational Neuroscience][LACONEU] to be held from 13 to 31 January 2014 in
Valparaiso, Chile.

[LACONEU]: http://www.laconeu.cl/

## About the course

The principal aim of the 3rd Latin-American Summer School in Computational
Neuroscience is to promote in Latin America the field of Computational
Neuroscience through cutting edge mathematical and computational science tools
and its applications in Biomedical Research and Clinical Application. The
multidisciplinary study of brain function using neuroscience, mathematics and
computational approaches helps to a better understanding of brain
functionalities under normal or pathological states, as well as, to enhance
important advances in education, theoretical frameworks, brain imaging, and
biomedical therapies.

In this Summer School we expect to generate a participative and interactive
environment where the exchange between students and researchers, based on
fundamental theoretical and practical knowledge in computational neuroscience,
will foster regional internationalization establishing a strong and
long-lasting collaborations between Latin America and more developed
countries. The excellence of the Faculty team willing to participate in this
Summer School is a unique opportunity that will help to boost this research
area in our countries.

The organization of LACONEU2014 will cover many critical and complementary
areas (see topics from the program) with a direct impact and benefice for
helping further interaction among participants. The courses deal from
biophysics properties of neuronal network and their capacity for driving
specific behavior up to the applications of this knowledge to a large field of
brain function research from normal to pathological states. For instance,
unpaired learning and memory brain capacity that affect a large human
population with neurodegenerative process, where their understanding at the
earliest stages improves compensatory therapies. The later is a critical step
to help mental health welfare.

In LACONEU2014 we expect to contribute in the development of the great
potential, not always well exploited, that Latin America has in the field of
numerical sciences: (e.g.) physics, engineering and mathematics, together with
cutting edge tools in biomedicine. Along LACONEU2014 we will encourage and
motivate young graduate students and researchers to initiate interdisciplinary
work on biomedicine and bioengineering problems. We will also encourage the
creation of regional and international networks of collaborations reflected in,
for instance, joint research and thesis.
