---
author: Nicolas P. Rougier
layout: post
title:  Advanced Scientific Programming in Python
date:   2016-08-27
tags:   python
category: news
---

I'm very pleased to teach a course on scientific visualization at the [G-Node
summer school](https://python.g-node.org/wiki/) that will be held at the University of Reading, UK, September 5 -
11, 2016.

Scientists spend more and more time writing, maintaining, and debugging
software. While techniques for doing this efficiently have evolved, only few
scientists actually use them. As a result, instead of doing their research,
they spend far too much time writing deficient code and reinventing the
wheel. In this course we will present a selection of advanced programming
techniques with theoretical lectures and practical exercises tailored to the
needs of a programming scientist.

We use the Python programming language for the entire course. Python works as a
simple programming language for beginners, but more importantly, it also works
great in scientific simulations and data analysis. We show how clean language
design, ease of extensibility, and the great wealth of open source libraries
for scientific computing and data visualization are driving Python to become a
standard tool for the programming scientist.

This school is targeted at Master or PhD students and Post-docs from all areas
of science. Competence in Python or in another language such as Java, C/C++,
MATLAB, or Mathematica is absolutely required. Basic knowledge of Python and of
a version control system such as git, subversion, mercurial, or bazaar is
assumed. Participants without any prior experience with Python and/or git
should work through the proposed introductory material before the course.


