---
author: Nicolas P. Rougier
layout: post
title:  Reproduction is not replication !
date:   2017-02-01
tags:   reproducible science
category: news
---

I'll give a talk at the University of Reading about reproducibility and
replicability and will introduce the [ReScience](https://rescience.github.io)
journal. 

If computer science offers a large set of tools for prototyping, writing,
running, testing, validating, sharing and reproducing results, computational
science still lags behind. In the best case, authors may provide the sources of
their research as a compressed archive and feel confident their research is
reproducible. But this is not exactly true. Buckheit and Donoho (1995)
explained 20 years ago that « an article about computational result is
advertising, not scholarship. The actual scholarship is the full software
environment, code and data that produced the result. » The computational part
in computational sciences implies the use of computers, operating systems,
tools, frameworks, libraries and data. This leads to such a large number of
combinations (taking into account the version for each components) that the
chances to have the exact same configuration as one of your colleague are
nearly zero.This draws consequences in our respective computational approaches
in order to make sure research can be actually and faithfully shared and
replicated. ReScience is a peer-reviewed journal that target computational
research and encourage the explicit replication of already published research
promoting new and open-source implementations. The goal is to ensure the
original research is replicable, but more importantly, ReScience aims at the
cross-fertilization of research by incitating researcher to replicate the work
of others, hoping this might pave the way for future collaborations or give
rise to new ideas as a result of the replication effort.
