---
author: Nicolas P. Rougier
layout: post
title:  Sequence learning and rules extraction
date:   2018-03-02
tags:   Machine Learning PhD
category: news
---

My PhD student, Ikram Chraibi Kaadoud, will defend her PhD thesis about the
"Sequence learning and rules extraction from recurrent neural networks:
application to the drawing of technical diagrams" at 14h00 in the Ada Lovelace
room at the Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest center.

Implicit knowledge is acquired in two ways. The first consists in the
repetition of sequences, which allows the individual to extract implicitly
regularities. The second way is a migration of explicit knowledge into implicit
knowledge during the development of an expertise. In both cases, it is implicit
learning.  In our work, we endeavor to observe sequences of electrical
components and in particular the problem of extracting rules hidden in these
sequences, which are an important aspect of the extraction of business
expertise from technical drawings.  We place ourselves in the connectionist
domain, and we have particularly considered neuronal models capable of
processing sequences. We implemented two recurrent neural networks: the Elman
model and a model with LSTM (Long Short Term Memory) units. We have evaluated
these two models on different artificial grammars (Reber's grammar and its
variations) in terms of learning, their generalization abilities and their
management of sequential dependencies.  Finally, we have also shown that it is
possible to extract the encoded rules (from the sequences) in the recurrent
network with LSTM units, in the form of an automaton.  The electrical domain is
particularly relevant for this problem. It is more constrained with a limited
combinatorics than the planning of tasks in general cases like navigation for
example, which could constitute a perspective of this work.

