---
author: Nicolas P. Rougier
layout: post
title:  A Natural History of Skills
date:   2018-08-30
tags:   Publication Neuroscience Review
category: news
---

The dorsal pallium (a.k.a. cortex in mammals) makes a loop circuit with the
basal ganglia and the thalamus known to control and adapt behavior but the
who's who of the functional roles of these structures is still
debated. Influenced by the Triune brain theory that was proposed in the early
sixties, many current theories propose a hierarchical organization on the top
of which stands the cortex to which the subcortical structures are
subordinated. In particular, habits formation has been proposed to reflect a
switch from conscious on-line control of behavior by the cortex, to a fully
automated subcortical control. In this review, we propose to revalue the
function of the network in light of the current experimental evidence
concerning the anatomy and physiology of the basal ganglia-cortical circuits in
vertebrates. We briefly review the current theories and show that they could be
encompassed in a broader framework of skill learning and performance. Then,
after reminding the state of the art concerning the anatomical architecture of
the network and the underlying dynamic processes, we summarize the evolution of
the anatomical and physiological substrate of skill learning and performance
among vertebrates. We then review experimental evidence supporting for the
hypothesis that the development of automatized skills relies on the BG teaching
cortical circuits and is actually a late feature linked with the development of
a specialized cortex or pallium that evolved in parallel in different taxa. We
finally propose a minimal computational framework where this hypothesis can be
explicitly implemented and tested. Published in [**Progress in
Neurobiology**](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2018.08.003)

## References

{% bibliography --query @*[doi=10.1016/j.pneurobio.2018.08.003] %}
