---
author: Nicolas P. Rougier
layout: post
title:  Induction of a non-competitive behavior in a duopoly
date:   2019-03-26
tags:   decision making economy market competition
category: news
---

Duopolies are situations where two independent sellers compete for capturing
market shares. Such duopolies do exist in the world economy (e.g. Boeing /
Airbus, Samsung / Apple, Visa / MasterCard) and have been extensively studied
in the literature using theoretical models. Among these models, the spatial
model of Hotelling (1929) is certainly the most prolific and has generated
subsequent literature, each work introducing some variation leading to
different conclusions. However, most models assume consumers to have unlimited
access to information (perfect information hypothesis) and to be rational. Here
we consider a situation where consumers have limited access to information and
explore how this factor influences the behavior of competing firms. We first
characterized three decision-making processes followed by individual firms
(maximizing one's profit, maximizing one's relative profit with respect to the
competitor; or tacit collusion) using a simulated model, varying the level of
information of consumers. These manipulations alternatively lead the firms to
minimally or maximally differentiate their relative position. We then tested
the model with human participants in the role of firms and characterized their
behavior according to the model. Our results demonstrate that limited access to
information by consumers can actually induce a mutually beneficial
non-competitive behavior of firms, which is not traceable to explicit collusive
strategies. Imperfect information on the part of consumers can hence be
exploited by firms through basic and blind decision rules.  
Read the article at
[**nature.com/articles/s41599-019-0241-x**](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-019-0241-x)
(open access)
