---
author: Nicolas P. Rougier
layout: post
title:  Idealizations in Computational Neuroscience
date:   2019-03-03
tags:   philosophy computational neuroscience
category: news
---

Our session “Idealizations in Computational Neuroscience: Facticity, Pragmatics
and the Coding Heuristics”, with Daniel Kostic and Cédric Brun, has been
accepted for the biennal meeting of the [International Society for the
History, Philosophy and Social Studies of Biology](https://www.ishpssb.org/) to
take place in Oslo, Norway, July 7-12, 2019.

The three-levels analysis (computational theory, representation and algorithm,
hardware implementation) proposed by D. Marr has profoundly influenced the
neuroscience community during the last few decades. At the higher computational
level, Marr proposes to investigate what is the goal of the computation, why is
it appropriate, and what is the logic of the strategy by which it can be
carried out. There is however a hidden difficulty for the modeler since the
goal and the logic she may find in a behaving organism is biased by her own
cognition. It thus draws consequences on the core design of a model but maybe
more importantly, it draws consequences on the interpretation and the
explanation this model may provide. Using a simple model of decision making,
we’ll show how its interpretation remains ambiguous until it is actually
incarnated into a body (i.e. a robot). Yet, if such embodiment helps in the
interpretation of the model by giving us access to the observation of its
behavior, it still does not guarantee the interpretation is unbiased. We’ll
illustrate this conundrum on a simple but fully specified formal model whose
“behavior" can be naturally interpreted but does not correspond to the
underlying hardware implementation.
