=========================================
GliPy, The OpenGL IPython/Python terminal
=========================================

.. contents::

Introduction
============

One of Python's most useful features when associated with the numpy scientific
package is its interactive interpreter.  This system allows very fast testing of
ideas without the overhead of creating test files as is typical in most
programming languages.  However, the interpreter supplied with the standard
Python distribution is somewhat limited for extended interactive use since it
does not provide visualization capabilities.  One can use additonal packages
such as `matplotlib <http://matplotlib.sourceforge.net/>`_ or mayavi `mlab
<http://code.enthought.com/projects/mayavi>`_ package, but those are more
oriented towards static visualization.

The goal of glipy is to create a comprehensive environment for interactive and
exploratory computing. To support this goal, glipy has two main components:

* An interactive Python terminal.
* An architecture for embedding various graphical elements directly within the
  terminal.

  .. image:: glipy.png


Installation
============

Depending on your level of expertise and your resilience to bugs, you may
install glipy from three different sources.

**Installation using easy_install**

If you have ``setuptools`` installed, the easiest way of getting glipy is to
simply use ``easy_install``::

	$ easy_install glipy

That's it.

**Installation from sources**

If you don't want to use ``easy_install``, or don't have it installed, just grab
the latest stable build of GLiPy from `here
<http://www.loria.fr/~rougier/glipy/dist/glipy-beta.tar.gz>`_.  Then do the following::

	$ tar -xzf glipy.tar.gz
	$ cd glipy
	$ python setup.py install

If you are installing to a location (like ``/usr/local``) that requires higher
permissions, you may need to run the last command with ``sudo``.

**Installing the development version**

It is also possible to install the development version of glipy from the `Bazaar
<https://launchpad.net/glipy/>`_ source code repository.  To do this you will
need to have Bazaar installed on your system.  Then just do::

	$ bzr branch lp:glipy
	$ cd glipy
	$ python setup.py install


Quick start
===========

glipy is essentially an interactive terminal that can be started most simply by
typing::

    $ glipy &

There is some availble command line options that can be consulted using the
``-h`` command line option.


Terminal
========

While you  may think that  you're face to  a regular terminal once  you started
glipy, it is indeed  not the fact. The terminal is a  very light emulation of a
regular  terminal using  the pyglet  package. Because  of this  emulation, most
usual key bindings need to be  emulated while some others are just not emulated
at all. The following readline key bindings are currently supported:

  **Control-A**
    Move text cursor to the start of the current line

  **Control-B**
    Move text cursor backward one character

  **Control-C**
    Abord current command line

  **Control-D**
    Exit if command line is empty, else delete forward character

  **Control-E**
    Move text cursor to the end of the current line

  **Control-F**
    Move text cursor forward one character

  **Control-K**
    Kill line from cursor position

  **Control-L**
    Clear terminal but the prompt line

  **Control-Y**
    Yank kill buffer at cursor position

  **Tab**
    Show possible completions fo the command line

  **Arrow up**
    Previous history command line

  **Arrow down**
    Next history command line


Editor
======

glipy provides a very rudimentary text editor that can be invoked using the
``ed`` command when using the IPython shell. You can exit the editor anytime by
pressing the ``escape`` key when the mouse pointer is over the editor
sub-window. This saves the edited file with the provided filename and returns to
the shell.


Basic numpy support
===================

One of the main interest of glipy is to offer support for various graphic
elements that can be embedded directly within the terminal. The numpy element
offers support for the visualization of one to several numpy arrays.  If you
want to quickly test glipy numpy support, just type::

   >>> numpy.random.random((50,50))

from within the terminal and you should see the following:

    .. image:: screenshot-1.png

What is happening behind the scene is that glipy provides numpy with a string
representation of an array (using the ``numpy.set_string_function()``) and uses
this function (``figure``) to actually display the array using a set of default
parameters (and returns an empty string).

The displayed  figure is not  a simple image  but a live representation  of the
array. If  you modify the  array, you'll see  immediate changes in  the graphic
representation as well. For example, you can try::

  >>> z = numpy.random.random((50,50))
  >>> z
  >>> z[0:25,0:25] = 0

and observe that changes are taken into account immediately.

  .. image:: screenshot-2.png

When the mouse pointer is over the figure, you can interact in different ways:

  **Mouse scroll button**
    Zoom in and out the figure

  **Shift + mouse left button**
    Move the figure

  **Mouse left button click**
    If you click on an array, this will send a ``on_select`` event with the
    related array and coordinates. You can add a pyglet-like event handler to
    catch this event from within your code.

  **Escape**
    Center the figure if not centered, else, reset zoom level to 1.0.

  **Control-S**
    Save the figure using filename pattern ``screenshot-%2d.png``


Extended numpy support
======================

While the direct display of arrays is quite convenient, there are of course some
cases where one needs more control over arrays layout or colors. glipy provides
a way to do that using the ``figure`` command.

**Layout**

The basic usage is quite simple::

  >>> z1 = numpy.random.random((50,50))
  >>> z2 = numpy.random.random((50,50))
  >>> fig = figure(z1, z2)

The above command displays z1 and z2 side by side:

  .. image:: screenshot-3.png

but if you prefer to have z1 on top of z2, you can also write::

  >>> fig = figure([z2], [z1])

and get:

  .. image:: screenshot-4.png


Similarly, if you need to display several arrays on top of each others, you can
write::

  >>> z1 = numpy.random.random((50,50))
  >>> z2 = numpy.random.random((50,50))
  >>> z3 = numpy.random.random((50,50))
  >>> fig = figure([z1], [z2,z3])

and get:

  .. image:: screenshot-5.png

If you look more closely at the displayed arrays, you will notice that any cell
of any arrays has the exact same size as any other cell. This is the result of the
packing algorithm that computes place and size of for each array. But if arrays
are of different sizes, the result may not pleasant or convenient like in the
following example::

  >>> z1 = numpy.random.random((50,50))
  >>> z2 = numpy.random.random((10,10))
  >>> fig = figure(z1, z2)

One can see that z2 may be too small:

  .. image:: screenshot-6.png

One way to solve the problem is to indicate that the z2 array must be zoomed::

  >>> z1 = numpy.random.random((50,50))
  >>> z2 = numpy.random.random((10,10))
  >>> fig = figure(z1, (z2,5.0))

and the new result will be:

  .. image:: screenshot-7.png

As you may have guessed by now (if you read the whole document), the figure
command considers that each list represents a line of arrays to be displayed and
the number of lists gives the number of rows. Each array is then placed in this
meta-array at its natural position. However, this prevents any array to span
several rows or several columns of the meta-array. One way to partly solve the
problem is to indicate that a specific array span several rows or several
columns::

  >>> z1 = numpy.random.random((21,21))
  >>> z2 = numpy.random.random((10,10))
  >>> z3 = numpy.random.random((10,10))
  >>> fig = figure([z2, z1],
                   [z3,'|'])

In this example, z1 spans two rows, indicated by the ``|`` character on the
second row at the same column position as z1 in the first row.

  .. image:: screenshot-8.png

Alternatively, you could also have written::

  >>> z1 = numpy.random.random((21,21))
  >>> z2 = numpy.random.random((10,10))
  >>> z3 = numpy.random.random((10,10))
  >>> fig = figure([z1, '-'],
                   [z2, z3])

to get:

  .. image:: screenshot-9.png

Finally, the default padding between each array is exaclty one cell but you can
change it by giving a new ``pad`` when creating the figure.


**Colors**

Together with the arrays layout, you can also indicate what colormap to use
among those availables:

  **IceAndFire**
    .. image:: colormap-IceAndFire.png

  **Ice**
    .. image:: colormap-Ice.png

  **Fire**
    .. image:: colormap-Fire.png

  **Hot**
    .. image:: colormap-Hot.png

  **Grey**
    .. image:: colormap-Grey.png

  **DarkRed**
    .. image:: colormap-DarkRed.png

  **DarkGreen**
    .. image:: colormap-DarkGreen.png

  **DarkBlue**
    .. image:: colormap-DarkBlue.png

  **LightRed**
    .. image:: colormap-LightRed.png

  **LightGreen**
    .. image:: colormap-LightGreen.png

  **LightBlue**
    .. image:: colormap-LightBlue.png

You can of course create your own  colormap, just have a look at colormap.py to
see how it can  be done.  For each colormap, you can  indicate a specific color
for under value, over value and bad value and set the minimum and maximum value
to be represented (default is -1,+1).

When no colormap is indicated, the default colormap ``cmap`` is used. This is
especially impotant for direct display of arrays.
